---
layout: post
title:	book review | so good they can't ignore you by cal newport
date:   2021-01-02
description: skills over thrills
---
When you ask people who love their work how they got there, it seems passion isn't one of the drivers. For many of them, it comes after they have already become skilled, which is the premise of this book. It seems that there are three important factors for loving the work you do: competence, control, and purpose. In [So Good They Can't Ignore You](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13525945-so-good-they-can-t-ignore-you), Cal Newport argues that your career path will also follow in that order. First, career capital: you must become so good that you're invaluable. Second, translate that leverage into securing more autonomy over your work, giving you more options and opportunities. Last, the mission: an overarching theme of your work, a goal that will give purpose to your work, can only come once you have fulfilled your potential. Otherwise, how can you know what your mission is, or what you're passionate about, if you don't even know what you can do?

His approach is starkly different from the usual feel-good take of just passionately jumping head first into what you want to be doing. The problem is that if you haven't already acquired unique skills, you don't stand out from all the others trying to succeed in the same field, however flaming your passion may be. General advice: if something just happens to sound good and warm and fluffy, like "follow your dreams", it's probably because people want it to be true, not that it is true. Instead of adopting this mainstream passion mindset, or what satisfaction your job can offer you, Cal wants you to think like a craftsman. A craftsman mindset is being satisfied by doing good work, by offering something to the world that people are willing to pay you for, and that can only happen if you're really good at it. 

He interviews several successful people who embody these principles. A general takeaway is that they all switched directions only after acquiring the necessary skills, and when the alternative path became financially viable. The clearest example of skills before passion and mission is Prof. Sabati, who has a clear mission: eradicate infectious diseases, as well as lots of career capital: Harvard professor, and also loves what she does. Yet, on examining her life more closely, it turns out her mission came only at the end of her PhD, her original passion was math or becoming a doctor. This is also a person who decided to get (and got) an MD while doing a PhD in human genetics, which to me doesn't sound like someone who had already figured out their purpose. Instead, she dutifully invested early in career capital, and passion and mission came after. Only when her hard-earned competence allowed her to pinpoint present-day selection in the human genome during her PhD did she realize what she wanted to dedicate her life to (infectious disease eradication).

Contrast this with a few others mentioned that just quit their jobs in banking or software and followed their passion to e.g. create a travel blog or start a yoga studio. They threw away whatever career capital they had along with financial security to jump into an unrelated field with zero connections, knowledge or skills. Of course they failed and failed quickly. It's not that the field couldn't be lucrative, their pivot could make sense if maybe they already had a few clients, but they didn't, so they forgot to heed an important rule of the book: do what people are willing to pay you for.

Lastly, on the topic of becoming so good they can't ignore you, Cal doesn't say much. There are some general tips offered, like measuring results and improvement often, deliberate practice etc. But his goal is to convince you that you'll become passionate about what you become good at, so that's the focus of this book. It a short and fun read, but it could probably be condensed into a long essay. I found most of the examples unnecessary and there's quite a few. After all, he could have just cherry picked what confirmed his thesis. But it's good to have a book that pushes back on courageously leaping into what you're passionate about without thinking hard about what you can offer.