---
layout: post
title:  why don't we teach students how to learn better?
date:   2021-01-08
description: they should learn how to learn
hidden: true
---
http://augmentingcognition.com/ltm.html

https://www.gwern.net/Spaced-repetition#subjects examples of 

There are two ways to improve learning in school, one is to teach better, the other is to learn better. A lot of effort is being expended every year on the former: we have revised curricula, incentivized teachers and a myriad other things. But that's only half the equation in gaining knowledge. If you don't know *how* to learn, it's not enough. Of course, given infinite time and effort, you could learn almost everything, but in reality we have a limited amount of willpower and effort to expend. So why don't we teach the students how to learn better? Why do we make students rediscover the useful habits and efficient ways of studying instead of teaching them? 

Our current approach is akin to teaching a mathematics course by throwing problem sets at students without ever telling them about the Pythagorean theorem or the quadratic formula. Some might stumble upon these mathematical truths themselves, but for most this would render the math course orders of magnitude more difficult. It's like a new company hire not trained to do their job, since the students' job is to learn. So why aren't we training them to do their job from the start?

It's not that we don't know what improves learning, or that everyone needs different techniques. The field of experimental psychology has a good idea of what works and what doesn't in terms of learning. Unfortunately, what most students do by default is suboptimal, which is just passively reading or highlighting passages. This leads to a lot of over-learning, i.e. wasting time on material already mastered, as well as a false illusion of competence. Leaving aside whether pure memorization is what we should strive for in school, it turns out that if our goal is remembering, there are other much better ways to do it. There's evidence for studying in groups, explaining what you know, etc., but what I want to focus on, what seems to work extremely well, is active retrieval practice, especially when coupled with spaced repetition.

Retrieval practice is testing yourself to recall information, instead of just re-reading to remind yourself of it. The literature is clear on this, but to give an example, [Roediger & Karpicke show](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16507066/) that:

> students in a repeated-testing condition recalled much more after a week than did students in a repeated-study condition (61% vs. 40%), even though students in the former condition read the passage only 3.4 times and those in the latter condition read it 14.2 times.

Note that self-testing is different from school tests, whose purpose is to just check how much you know. They don't help much because they're only administered once, whereas self-testing requires multiple rounds of answering, and can include coming up with the questions yourself, further stimulating learning. It's also not the case that being tested makes you better at tests, because the goal is remembering.

If self-testing is a reagent for learning, then [spaced repetition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spaced_repetition) is the catalyst. It is the simple idea that you space the self-testing in time, and there's good evidence to suggest that the interval should increase exponentially. For example, you test yourself now, then in an hour, then a day, a week, etc. This has the added benefit of large initial effort followed by minimal checkups to retain that knowledge, which mirrors our motivation for remembering something, large at first but weaker over time. With technology this is made extremely easy:  [Anki](https://apps.ankiweb.net/) is a flashcard based free program that will automatically track each card's interval for you, so all you have to do is make the cards. There are also many [decks](https://ankiweb.net/shared/decks/) freely available for common things like languages, so you don't have to painstakingly make the flashcards one by one. I have personally used it to study for the [GRE](https://ankiweb.net/shared/decks/gre), learn all the [countries in Africa](https://ankiweb.net/shared/info/170644734), all the [flags in the world](https://ankiweb.net/shared/info/3109551834), and the [bones in the human body](https://ankiweb.net/shared/info/718686062), all except the GRE for fun!

For courses like math, on the other hand, memory plays a smaller role, and there is probably nothing better than pure practice in problem solving. But here too, we know that *how* you practice is extremely important. When practicing a skill is a struggle, when you push yourself slightly beyond what you can currently do, when you want to take the intensity down or just give up, that's when the gains are large. It is grueling work and requires tremendous willpower, but it's what separates those who plateau and those who keep excelling.  An example would be math problems that are just hard enough that you can't just solve them outright or see the solution immediately, but also ones that are not impossible for your level of understanding.

The point is not to list all the techniques for learning, but to ask why they're not being taught to students or more widely known. I only discovered Anki in my second year of college, after more than 10 years of studying! It could have saved me, and society, countless hours. It is also so simple that anyone who stumbles upon them can incorporate them easily into their studying and become a better learner. There's two ways to think about the benefits of this. It will take you less time to master the same amount of material, or you can choose to master more material in the same amount of time. If learning the techniques takes e.g. one hour a week, as long as you save more than hour studying using these techniques you are coming out ahead. Of course, in reality, you'll probably learn how to learn in a few months, and reap the benefits for many years in the future, so it will be a bigger time investment upfront that will pay off your whole life.

It's important to point out that the argument "there's so many things to learn in this world, you're just adding another one", doesn't work here. Unlike adding another language requirement, be it foreign or programming, this course (or short seminar) would improve performance on all the other courses. Forcing students to learn yet another thing is zero-sum: any time spent on this new thing is time that is probably just taken from another course. But teaching students how to learn better will result in more knowledge accumulation in the same amount of time, so it is positive sum. This should be easy to do, we already know how to learn better, now we just have to tell everyone how to go about it.